# Introduction

\mm{add citations throughout intro!}

This dissertation introduces a new data visualization design process model to
guide and support visualization designers through the act of creating effective,
useful, and usable visualization systems. Existing visualization design process
models proved difficult to use in practice due to a disconnect with our design
decisions, evaluation methods, design artifacts, and which step we were in. We
propose the design activity framework to more effectively guide visualization
designers through a series of design activities. Each design activity has a
descriptive motivation, a collection of generative or evaluative design methods,
and the goal of visualization artifacts, such as design requirements, ideas,
prototypes, and systems. The design activity framework is grounded in a series
of formative and summative data visualization projects, where we encountered
limitations of existing models and utilized this framework as a solution. This
framework is validated through series of case studies in the fields of biology,
cyber security, and data storytelling and also by an evaluation of design
activity worksheets taught in a data visualization classroom for use in a
cumulative project.


As motivation, we identify five high-level goals that, if met, could improve
upon existing visualization design process models: **achievability**,
**flexibility**, **justifiability**, **discoverability**, and **actionability**.
Specifically, existing models failed to clearly lay out goals for steps of the
design process, while the design activity framework includes achievable
artifacts and connections to justifiable design decisions. With an activity's
clear motivation, list of discoverable design methods, and flexible flow
principles, the design activity framework is also more actionable and could help
guide visualization designers effectively through the process. By working to
capture these five goals, the design activity framework is a significant
contribution and improvement upon previous models for data visualization design.


To be _achievable_, a design process model should clearly highlight the desired
visualization outcomes. The proposed process model, the design activity
framework, is composed of a series of steps. Each step is clearly defined and
separated by a distinct motivation. Additionally, visualization designers are
given a clear end product to work toward in each step: a visualization artifact.
By defining these steps and visualization artifacts, the design activity
framework increases the achievability for designers to produce visualization
artifacts and progress forward to the next step.


A design process model should support _flexible_ iteration along with divergent
and convergent methodologies. The design activity framework meets this goal by
defining its four steps as activities, and these activities can be conducted in
various orders, nested, and even conducted in parallel by different members of a
visualization design team. This framing supports a rich, complex, and flexible
design process in ways many existing visualization design process models failed
to support. Additionally, each step differentiates between generative and
evaluative methods, where generative methods allow for divergent approaches that
encourage exploration, novelty, creativity, and innovation and the evaluative
methods winnow and narrow these artifacts to a smaller set.


Since steps can involve evaluative methods, it is important for a design process
model to include _justifiable_ design decisions as part of visualization
designers' rationale, and no existing models have made this connection of these
design decisions into the design process. The design activity framework includes
evaluative methods in each step or activity to promote the validation,
justification, and formation of or building upon existing guidelines. These
methods and guidelines inform the design process and potential visualization
artifacts. It is important to capture visualization designers' decisions and
rationale for establishing rigor and transferability of a visualization design
process and its various artifacts.


With a broad range of generative and evaluative methods at their disposal,
visualization designers could benefit from a _discoverable_ approach for
finding, utilizing, and reflecting on the use of different design methods. These
design methods could be incorporated from a variety of different fields, from
human-computer interaction to design to software engineering. The design
activity framework specifically pulls from user-centered design methodologies to
organize, suggest, and promote new kinds of design methods for visualization
designers to employ. By emphasizing these design methods that focus on
identifying and designing for user needs, the methods in this process model are
useful for visualization designers conducting applied research with domain
experts, such as design studies. The design activity framework was constructed
to highlight, correlate, and promote the discovery and inclusion of these
user-centered design methods for a wide array of different visualization design
projects.


Lastly, a crucial aspect of a visualization design process model is how
_actionable_ it is, for it to be understood, taught, and utilized by
visualization designers. The design activity framework was created with succinct
terminology, which has a benefit of clarity for teaching the concepts to
visualization design novices. Furthermore, by outlining four concrete steps with
evaluation throughout, the framework encourages novices to think about design
rationale and reinforce their visualization knowledge by practicing and applying
guidelines across diverse situations and projects. Visualization designers can
learn to conduct their own design process when activities are further broken
down into concrete steps, and worksheets for this framework support such a walk
through approach. The notion of iteration in design can also be emphasized,
taught, and realized by novices using these worksheets for real-world
visualization projects.




5 goals:
- artifacts, recordability, documentable, transferable?, **achievable**
- flexibility, recordable, **flexible**
- decision-?, evaluatability, guidelines?, guidable?, **justifiable**
- UCD methods, usability? needs, involvement, visibility/accessibility/legibility/language, **discoverable**
- actionability, tangible?, **actionable**

Flexible: (TODO check into the creative process model definition?)

