This dissertation establishes a new visualization design process model devised
to guide visualization designers in building more effective and useful
visualization systems and tools. The novelty of this framework includes its
flexibility for iteration, actionability for guiding visualization designers
with concrete steps and concise yet methodical definitions, and connections to
other visualization design models commonly used in the field of data
visualization. In summary, the design activity framework breaks down the
visualization design process into a series of four design activities:
_understand_, _ideate_, _make_, and _deploy_. For each activity, the framework
prescribes a descriptive motivation, list of design methods, and expected
visualization artifacts.


To elucidate the framework, two case studies for visualization design illustrate
these concepts, methods, and artifacts in real-world projects in the field of
cyber security. For example, user-centered design methods, such as personas and
data sketches, are employed in these projects and emphasize our teams'
motivations and visualization artifacts with respect to the design activity
framework. These case studies also serve as examples for novice visualization
designers, and we hypothesized that the framework could serve as a pedagogical
tool for teaching and guiding novices through their own design process to create
a visualization tool.


To evaluate the pedagogical efficacy of this framework, we created worksheets
for each design activity, outlining a series of concrete, tangible steps for
novices. In order to validate the design worksheets, we conducted 13 student
observations over the course of two months, received 32 online survey responses,
and performed a qualitative analysis of 11 in-depth interviews. Students found
the worksheets both useful and effective for framing the visualization design
process. Next, by applying the design activity framework to technique-driven and
evaluation-based research projects, we brainstorm possible extensions to the
design model. Lastly, we examine implications of the design activity framework
and present future work in this space. There are many aspects for the data
visualization community to consider on how to more effectively describe,
capture, and communicate the complex, iterative nature of data visualization
design throughout research, design, development, and deployment of visualization
systems and tools.

<!-- ThesisOffice: check margins throughout!
     1.25 inches on the left and right and 1 inch only on the bottom -->
