# Conclusion {#sec:conclusion}

In this work, we have introduced the design activity framework as a way to teach
novice visualization designers how to walk through and perform their own design
process. We did so by creating concise terminology and step-by-step worksheets
that connect visualization design decisions to their visualization artifacts.
...

\sm{wrap-up and reiterate story}





## Discussion and Future Work

The design activity framework lays ground work for further research into the
space connecting creative design with engineering design.
...


The design activity framework is by no means complete. Future projects may
reveal subtle aspects and new meanings to what visualization artifacts can mean
for a project.
...
The design activity can and should evolve over time to adapt to more kinds of
visualization design projects to keep its use valid with how systems are
designed for users.


More work still needs to be done to continue the validation of this framework.
While this dissertation presents several case studies to support the design
activity framework, there are still other models out there to be considered and
validated as well. Different people may work better with other models or by
adapting existing ones, from the visualization field or otherwise.
...


Lastly, the distinction between technique-driven work and problem-driven work
provides another interesting challenge for design models. This work focused
heavily on problem-driven work, with a few case studies where techniques did
come out of them.
...
While we believe the design activity framework can have connections with
technique-driven work, more study and validation is required to investigate this
notion.

