This dissertation would not have been possible without the guidance, support,
and critique of my supervisory committee: Miriah, Alexander, Tamara, James, and
Nathalie. Miriah has been a huge guiding light throughout my PhD, keeping me
focused on the big picture and teaching me how to become a visualization
designer, researcher, and practitioner. It has been an honor to work with her
over these past five years, and it has been a pleasure to learn and grow under
her mentorship. Alexander has provided similar support and mentorship, and it
has been a pleasure to work with him as the Visualization Design Lab was
established and for the data visualization course. Tamara played a big role in
guiding me through the vast topic of research ethics and human research, and her
course on human-centered security helped motivate the data sketches design
method that I conducted. James taught me, through practice, observation, and
discussion, a lot about design and making better software systems for humans to
use, and I enjoyed our project together as we redesigned a visualization tool
and formulated the groundwork for the design activity framework. Lastly, but
certainly not least, Nathalie and I worked together for years, from visualizing
set-typed data to establishing requirements for a storytelling authoring tool,
and her inspiration, enthusiasm, and brilliance helped us describe and evaluate
concepts for visual narrative flow.


I would like to thank my family and friends for all their support throughout the
tumultuous time as I pursued a graduate degree. My parents raised me to be an
open-minded and driven individual, for which I am very thankful, and my parents
and brother have always been a solid rock for me to depend on over time,
emotionally and financially, everything from lending an open ear to helping me
move. In my extended family, my grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins have
always been a sounding board of intelligence and wisdom as well as further
support. My close friends, Alyssa Lewis, Evan Foster, and Lora Orme, have all
provided me with additional support, comfort, and much needed laughter. I am
blessed to have had all these wonderful people in my life. I have also been
graced with some amazing animals during my graduate career --- Evey, my first
cat, has provided me with warmth and comfort over the years while also serving
as a living alarm clock; my betta fish, Mulberry, adds colorful delight to my
day; and three ferrets, Noodle, Flopsy, and Lucy, have been a welcome
distraction from the everyday stresses of life.


The pursuit of my graduate career would not have been possible without the
dedication of many individuals to my educational and personal experiences. Back
in middle school, I was a very quiet and solitary child, and through the concern
of my teachers and the help of Christian Ammon, I was able to come out of my
shell and embrace my passions outside the classroom, such as tabletop gaming and
technical theater, and over time Christian grew from a mentor into a colleague
and friend. These experiences in theater led me to make many other great friends
and mentors, from Thomas Bourke to LuAnne Richardt to Mark Weiss to Larry
Kirchgaessner. I owe all of them so much for helping hone my attention to detail
and troubleshooting skills to be what they are today. For my education, I have
to thank my teachers, and William Heeren was one of the most dedicated teachers
I have ever had. Despite only taking one chemistry class from him, he mentored
me throughout high school in Science Olympiad and SMART Team, and it is through
these experiences that my love and passion for computer science grew. The
outstanding professors at Cornell College helped further that education in
computer science, physics, and chemistry, with the academic excellence and rigor
instilled to me by many professors, such as Tony deLaubenfels, Leon Tabak, Lyle
Lichty, Kara Beauchamp, Derin Sherman, and Craig Teague. I would not be where I
am today without all of these wonderful educators and mentors, and for that I am
eternally grateful.


I would like to personally thank the following colleagues of the University of
Utah Visualization Design Lab for all their help and feedback on this
dissertation: Ethan Kerzner, P. Samuel Quinan, Alex Bigelow, Nina McCurdy,
Carolina Nobre, Jimmy Moore, T Cameron Waller, and Kristen Zygmunt. I also thank
Jonzy and Dan Bowden for their cooperation and feedback on the visualization
data sketches method. The staff members at MIT Lincoln Laboratory played a
significant role in the success of the BubbleNet project from design to
deployment, which was made possible through the guidance of Diane Staheli. For
the redesign project, Dominika Mazur, Matthew Parkin, and James Agutter all
contributed significantly to this project as well. On the s-CorrPlot tool, this
project would not have been possible without the initial tool written by Samuel
Gerber, as well as the additional feedback from Kristi Potter, Wei-Chao Huang,
Tom Fletcher, and Kristen Zygmunt. In the narrative flow project, this
evaluation would not have been possible without the guiding support of Bongshin
Lee and Jeremy Boy, as well as feedback provided from researchers and interns at
Microsoft Research. I would like to thank both Michael Sedlmair and Mike Kirby
for their feedback and advice when writing the initial design activity framework
paper. I would also like to thank Christine Pickett for her many edits,
corrections, and comments throughout my dissertation. Lastly, the faculty and
staff at the School of Computing and SCI Institute have helped guide my
educational career and further my academic research in computer science, and I
cannot thank them all enough for this support and dedication.


The work presented in this dissertation would not have been possible without
funding support. A majority of this work is sponsored by the Air Force Research
Laboratory and the DARPA XDATA program. Additionally, I was provided the Wayne
Brown Fellowship by the College of Engineering, which aided in my first years of
research and study. During my graduate career, I also was funded through two
internships at MIT Lincoln Laboratory as well as one at Microsoft Research. This
work is also sponsored in part by the Office of Naval Research award
N00014-12-1-0601 and the U.S. Army Research Office under a prime contract issued
to Intelligent Automation, Inc. The Lincoln Laboratory portion of this work was
sponsored by the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research & Engineering under
Air Force Contract FA8721-05-C-0002. Opinions, interpretations, conclusions, and
recommendations are those of the authors and are not necessarily endorsed by the
United States government or Intelligent Automation, Inc. The content of the
information does not necessarily reflect the position or the policy of the
government, and no official endorsement should be inferred.


This dissertation builds off of a variety of published research for which we
obtained permissions for re-use.
Reprinted [@McKenna2014], with permission, from McKenna, Sean and Mazur, Dominika and Agutter, James and Meyer, Miriah; "Design activity framework for visualization design"; _Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics_; and \copyright\ 2014 IEEE.
Reprinted [@McKenna2015], with permission, from McKenna, Sean and Staheli, Diane and Meyer, Miriah; "Unlocking user-centered design methods for building cyber security visualizations"; _Proceedings of the International Symposium on Visualization for Cyber Security_; \copyright\ 2015 IEEE.
Reprinted [@mckenna2015s], by permission of the American Statistical Association (<https://www.amstat.org>), from McKenna, Sean and Meyer, Miriah and Gregg, Christopher and Gerber, Samuel; "s-CorrPlot: An interactive scatterplot for exploring correlation"; _Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics_; \copyright\ 2015 Taylor & Francis.
Reprinted [@mckenna2016], with permission, from McKenna, Sean and Staheli, Diane and Fulcher, Cody and Meyer, Miriah; "BubbleNet: A cyber security dashboard for visualizing patterns"; _Computer Graphics Forum_; \copyright\ 2016 John Wiley and Sons.
